You were talking about the areas of emphasis, I
believe. And this was reflected in, as you would
imagine, in large measure by the people who were
here and those we recruited early on. Silver
culture was certainly something that we
emphasized. We had strengths in soils. And this is
another example of why you can build strong
programs at Texas A&M because not only did we have
strength in soils, but we also could draw on the
soil and crop sciences department for strength
over there as well. You could say the same thing
about economics and so on, because forestry, like
most of those kind of fields, are made up of a group
of disciplines. And so you hear faculty come to you
trained in the discipline with an application to
forestry.
Silver culture soils, our investment in wood
technology
was in wood chemistry.
If you go toward solid wood research and this sort
of thing, it gets to be terribly expensive. So we
hired a wood chemist, Dr. Goldstein, to lead that
effort. And he did extremely well.
And again, related to other chemists on the campus
who had a common interest in cellulose chemistry.
It took a while for, except for the people that were
already established, it took a while for us to
develop areas of emphasis.
The evolution of a new department and new faculty
is such that they spend their early years getting
their teaching programs established because
those students show up every day. And
this slows down the process in research a bit. But
ultimately, they come
on and get a research program started and go on from
there. What were some of the first signals to you as
their leader that you were having some success?
Well,
I guess the first one was we applied for and gained
accreditation
for our program by the Society of American
Foresters in the minimum time required, which was
five years.
The society has been accrediting forestry
education program since 1935 and has a
long-standing relationship with helping with
this national accrediting organization.
Anyway, it's a member of that. A lot of academic
programs have attempted to get into the
accreditation business, and they lack standards
and everything that goes with the accreditation
process. But SAF has been in the business a long
time, so we felt that was our first major In
this part of the world, then Stephen F. Austin,
LSU, Arkansas Monticello,
Oklahoma State, then Mississippi State,
Tennessee.
Auburn, Georgia, Florida, North Carolina State,
DPI. Do you have any idea how many nationally?
45, 50? Yeah.
And I presume as the years have gone on, there
haven't been any particular problems of
retaining that presentation. No, there have not.
And as you can imagine, there's a continuing
debate within the... Society of American
Foragers about what accreditation ought to be.
And everybody seems to have a different opinion
about that. But no, we've not had any trouble with
that. What about some important early faculty
accomplishments, recognitions, grants, et
cetera? Winning national awards.
Well, I don't know how much claim we can make here
because some of the more senior faculty that we
recruited had already, Goldstein, again, as an
example, has already established himself. And of
course, we are like the bird hunter. We claim all
the birds that fall, but Irv got some good national
awards in the 70s, I guess. Dave Boring, of course,
who was here when we started, received awards in
soils. I'm drawing a blank on anybody else right
now. In seeking... off-campus funding, where
does the person in forest return primarily for
submission
? Well, in that period of time, you primarily went
to industry for your off-campus funding,
although there were some, well, the U.S. Forest
Service had funding through its research arm that
you could gain access to, and we were successful
there in some cases.
but primarily industry and the federal system.
And, of course, then you always try to get the
director of the experiment station to include
something in his legislative budget request that
would be helpful
to you. Which industries, looking back over this
30 years, Which industries have been supportive
that you would like to mention? Well, Temple,
which is now Temple Inland, but I've gone through a
series of different kind of ownerships.
continues today to be supportive, and it's, as you
know, has family ties to East Texas. They've been
also very supportive of Stephen F. Austin, too.
Arthur tends to be fairly provincial in his view.
and wants to make sure his money stays in East Texas
and doesn't cross the Trinity River. But the
company itself has been very supportive. Kirby,
which is now Louisiana Pacific, was helpful to us
in the early going. Owens, Illinois,
which is now Champion
International,
St. Regis, Southland Paper Company,
Melvin
Kirk, Kirk family, and they helped us in different
ways. We largely approached the earth planning.
In fact, we still have a Southwest
scholarship
that started way back in the primary in the current
planning. In terms of students, about what was the
enrollment of people planning for as far as their
careers in the . Oh.
I'd say maybe 20. What we did was,
of course, when the word got out that we were going
to have a forestry department offer a U.S. degree,
then those people who were coming here for the
two-year program you
know, shifted
gears and stayed with us. But my guess is the first
bunch amounted to about 20 or something like that.
By the time when the program is fully approved, do
you remember what the enrollment might have been
about that time? Oh, by the coordinating board.
Probably not much
more. Were there any important landmarks such as
when the first forestry undergraduate degree was
granted? Yeah. Of course, that was
granted in one of our two-year
people
who were here in this state. And so I think the first
actual degree we granted was in 1971. Yeah, 1971,
because the department was started in 69. So I
think in two years, we'll be getting our first
degree. And we also had a cadre of graduate
students that had been here.
One who used to be on our faculty, got his PhD here
very early on. And so I guess probably
we had 10
or
15 graduate students when we got started. But they
had come, one, either to work on the PhD, but we had
already been granted that authority, or started .
Do you remember when the first PhD was granted? No,
I don't. It was after you arrived, though? Well,
as you can imagine, we get quite a number out of East
Texas. As the years have passed,
they come more out of the urban
centers. And it's not unusual to get them out of
West Texas, Fort Stockton
or someplace like that. But right now, the urban
areas
And very good students. By the time you got here,
women had already been admitted to the
university. Were the women in the forestry
program early? Not early.
Not early. Although, with time, we've had a good
number students,
both
graduate students and undergraduates. I
was talking to one the other day who's the new head
of the department at Clemson University. A
graduate of A&M? Yes. What's her name? Pat. You'll
remember when you were raised by Howard. That's
always an interesting process on this campus.
We were, of course, came out of the Range Science
Department. And so, Harry Kirkall had worked out
an arrangement for us move from the second floor to
the third floor in what's now the Peterson
Building, which was Plant Sciences then, and
occupy some space along the horticulture, and
maybe retain a little space in Range Science. I'm
not exactly sure how that worked, but we got our
offices away from the brain science department
and onto the third floor of Peterson. And they were
quite modest, I might add. But we did keep the labs
that we had down
in the building. And very soon, We got enough money
put together to build what's called a forest
science lab out on Agronomy Road now, right next to
purchasing and stores. Then go forward
chronologically. Where did you move to after this
first year? We thought we had died and gone to
heaven. when the recreation and parks department
moved out of the old horse barn.
And we were given that building. And we thought
that was absolutely wonderful. That was about
1972.
And so it did give us adequate office,
administrative
space, some teaching space. But we still, for that
time, we had the forest science lab out on the west
campus. So we had four big research
labs out there and some office space. So we were
pretty good here based on the number of people we
had. Of course, a lot of the research then and now to
some degree is conducted in East Texas field
research. What locations? Well, mostly on
industry land.
We had research located on companies that I named a
while ago, work out an arrangement with them to set
aside particular areas that had the kind of forest
and they
were very in fact I just sat in on a meeting day
before yesterday that will involve seven
companies not just in Texas but in Louisiana and
Arkansas
that will involve that sort of thing and they will
commit resources and people Now,
most of this of the apartments for service, most of
it is on the growing of the tree, or is it on the
processing and the chemistry of the tree that is
already there? Most of it is on what we would call
forest production, the growing and culture of
forest stands. Although we have had, I mentioned
Goldstein. Later on, we hired a guy by the name of
Joe Massey, who was an operations research guy. He
did an awful lot of work in temple's mills on how
they ought to position
their making their plywood and that sort of thing
and optimizing their mill operations. And so Joe
was here, gosh, 20 years or so and made a very
significant impact with his research. So that
most of it has
to do
with the pine trees. Yes. And the processing of the
trees. And some of the cabin maker, as a little kid,
remember, he was doing a lot of work with the
cyclists, which almost no longer is processed in
the country, but they do it all the time. No,
most of the hardwood that's cut today will go into
pulp and paper. That's a desired They have desired
characteristics for that fine paper business.
Except for the river bottoms in Texas, the quality
of the hardwoods is not very good. Not like you run
into over in the Carolinas and North Georgia and
that part of the world. Let's jump back to your new
service department head, Henry. Well,
you know, happily, most of it were joys.
Obviously, the typical frustrations come along
on personnel issues and this sort of thing,
funding, this sort of thing. But generally, I got
good support from the college dean's office.
Harry was a good dean. Well, Harry had a... First of
all, Harry was a scientist, so he understood where
science fit in the overall scheme of things in an
academic setting. But secondly, he also knew what
it took to make a department successful. And he was
accessible, easy to talk to, And
I found him
to be a very good boss. And then I ran into you in that
period of time, because somewhere along in there,
when you became dean of faculties, we used to have
to bring every faculty candidate that we were
interviewing to your office.
And I have, later on, I filched a lot of your
techniques that I saw you use during that
interview process. Because one of the things that
you did was share with those faculty members or
those candidates a lot
of It's
something that changes paths. We are
conservative students. We're changing, but we
don't change the fact that we kind of follow the
tradition of the world. And I remember one fellow
who was from Berkeley who looked like a smelly one,
but he acted like it. And he came back the next day
and thanked me. And he said, I don't really like it
here very much. And I said, no, you all wouldn't
like me. Well,
his role
was most pronounced when we were starting.
I mean, every time that we had a critical moved to
make, you know, he was there, he was supportive,
and offered good advice about how to do things and
that sort of thing. And then early on when we
started, he helped sweep the money together to get
that building out there. And so we'd have a place to
do some research and that sort of thing. So I'd say
his impact was greatest in the early years of my
tenure as department head. I found him to be just
super, and then later when I moved over to the
experiment station and started having a
different kind of relationship with him, I tended
to appreciate him even more. because,
you know, we'd have the usual problems with
personnel and funding and that sort of thing that
we had to work out. And he was just always a super guy
to try to work with. You were supported originally
to have them to couple. Patterson was gone by the
time I actually moved here. So you started out
reporting to Harry, and the whole eight years he
was redeemed? Right. Did you also report either to
the Experiment Station or Extension Service?
Well, yes, certainly the Experiment Station.
Jarvis Miller was involved there. toward the
latter part of that period of time. He was
associate director for a while and then he became
director. John Hutchison was director of
extension. Yeah, you could say I reported to him,
but we had, as every department head did, except
for maybe a few like Ty Timm, had a very different
relationship than we had with Jarvis or Harry.
John was a very dominant personality and there
wasn't much give or take there. And we didn't have
the budgetary and administrative relationship
with Extension at that time that they do now. In
general percentages, about what percentage
of the department's budget during those years
came from the academic, what percentage from the
experiment station, what percentage from the
extension service? I'd say probably 60% in the
early years was from the academic side. 30% from
Experiment Station and 10% from Extension. We
didn't have but one Extension specialist. Did
that change by the end of your eight years? Yes. How
so? The Experiment Station became a bigger
player. Extension never really changed during my
tenure there. All that came later. but we began to
bring in more researchers. Did you, as you had your
own personal set of goals for the department, did
you win, did you achieve every goal, or were there
some where you were frustrated? Well, your
ambitions are always fairly substantially
beyond your ability to accomplish, but I'd say We
set out as our first goal to become accredited, and
we achieved that in a timely way.
I think probably I had two disappointments. Our
enrollment did not grow as fast as I thought it
should. And I thought our
research
program
would probably go faster and larger than it did.
But other than that, I think the eight years I spent
were quite rewarding. Were there impediments on
campus to either of those goals, enrollment and
research? Were there any handicaps? Not really
that the institution imposed.
I think, you know, in most cases, we tend to, Those
sort of limitations tend to be self-imposed for
one reason or the other.
So I always viewed the institution as one of our
real strengths. As you look back on those years,
what were the key courses that a forest science
major took either in the department or out of it?
There must have been some key courses that were
submitted. Well,
obviously the first two years are a fairly common
set of courses that either by requirement or
whatever everybody takes, and certainly it's the
case now with the core curriculum. But we had a core
curriculum that was more on a departmental level
than it was on an institutional level. I'd say once
the student got beyond the the sophomore year.